What's going on? Over to you, can you please just introduce yourself?
Okay, my name's Sa, Sa Hansa, and I was born in Mauritius, which is a small island near the bottom of South Africa.
I was born in 1969, many years ago, and shall I say in Patrona, and I'll have a go at saying it in Patrona.
My name is Sa Hansa, I was born in Mauritius in 1969.
Incredible. And growing up, yeah, growing up in Mauritius, because you grew up there of course, can you just tell us what you remember about the area that you grew up in?
Okay, I came to London with my parents when I was a year old, and we have been to Mauritius on holidays.
My earliest memory is actually in London, South, when I was about three or four years old.
Just remembering having a happy, happy family home, playing in the garden.
We had a beautiful garden, lots of roses, and it was so peaceful and relaxing, no worries back then.
And what type of other fun things can you remember about actually growing up, was there certain games that you'd play with friends and things like that as well?
Yeah, yeah. In school we used to play a lot of skipping and hand games, I don't know what they were called, but they were like movements, and we'd sing a poem along with it.
And we used to play a lot of rounders, a lot of kind of thinking games, and doing a lot of reading.
We used to read a lot of books in our free time, a lot of Eany Blighton books. She was very popular back then.
And with my two brothers, I'd play sort of running games, and we'd chase each other and tease each other.
I have two brothers, one is, they're both younger than me, one is a few years younger than me, and the other one's probably about 11 years younger than me.
What was the experiences also, visiting Norwich? Did you visit quite young too? All the way growing up? What was those visits like?
I remember going back to Mauritius when I was about maybe four years old. I remember a wedding, my cousin got married, and we had a lovely time at the wedding.
We'd go back maybe every few years, we'd go on a holiday, see the family, my grandmother still lives there, and who lived there at the time, she's no longer around.
Unfortunately none of my grandparents are around now, but we used to go there and spend good family times together.
And as you said about the wedding as well, are there other events that are sticking inside your mind that you can remember? It could be in Norwich or even here as well in your upbringing.
Various events. As a child I think one of the most fun events I remember was celebrating Queen Elizabeth II's silver jubilee.
We had a big street party, and the whole neighbourhood got together, and we had races, games, cakes, drinks. It was a wonderful community spirit. That's one of my favourites.
Where were you living? Where was this? This was in East London.
Traveling or being around London, is there any other places you are able to visit?
I've been to different parks.
You mentioned that you came here at one year's old with your parents. Were you able to find out a reason why you decided to come to the UK?
Yes, both my parents were British citizens, but they decided that as a family we'd have a better life here in the UK.
Not long after I was born, my dad actually studied here as well. He was already familiar with the country here.
How is the connection to Wales?
It's just part of destiny. Some personal issues have brought us here.
We're here and we're enjoying getting with the community. I've been here for about 16 years now, which is a very long time. I'm gradually getting out and about and enjoying the community spirit here.
Did you have any expectations? You're in Newport, right?
Yes, I did. Unfortunately, not quite what I thought, but it is what it is.
You've been here for 16 years, which means you've seen a few changes. Are there changes to yourself as well?
Are there certain things that have drawn you to certain communities?
This community, Age Live Group and there's some other groups in Newport as well. They are aimed, not specifically, but mostly at ethnic minorities. So that was one thing that attracted me as well.
What was the question?
What assisted you in the change and what type of things were you drawn to?
That's okay, Nova.
I do really appreciate that.
What can you say about your involvement as well in the group? Are there certain aspects of the group that you enjoy being involved in?
I do enjoy learning, learning new things. I think Age Live recently had a course on pain management, which I attended. I think it was a six-week course.
I enjoy the trips. Occasionally they do trips. When I can go, I do and I enjoy that. Just finding out how they progress and what the next step is. Looking forward to whatever they're going to do next.
Just getting to see the different aspects of the community here is brilliant.
Are there one or two or even more events that stick out to you? You said about the trips, is there certain trips that stay in your mind that you can replay or something like that?
The trips that this group has been on.
Yeah, for Age Live.
There's been trips to London.
And I think there was a trip to Abergavenny not that long ago.
And to visit a castle. I can't remember the name of the castle on top of my head.
They've also had a trip to visit a garden in Swansea.
And they in particular stuck out for me.
I really enjoyed again, I enjoy taking pictures of the areas I was in and good memories.
Even with your experiences for Age Live and being around that level of community, why is that also important for that community and even young people in the future generation?
Why is it important to have these type of spaces?
I think it's really important actually because the next generation, there's so much that they can learn from the previous generation.
So whatever information, whatever we can do now to pass on to the next generation, hopefully it will assist them to maybe avoid making mistakes that we've made.
Or perhaps it will give them more of a sense of identity if they know where their family or friends came from.
Brilliant. Is there anything else that you'd like to share at all?
I don't know, is it an experience or if you're talking about your environment or even if it's about Age Live, is there anything?
Well I think if, yeah I did have a good family upbringing.
I'd like to give a lot of credit to my parents because it wasn't easy for them to bring their children up being the first generation.
It wasn't easy for them to bring us up.
At school I was the only Asian in my class. That wasn't easy.
But looking back it's made me who I am today. All of life experiences have made me who I am today.
And one thing I would like, if I could just offer some advice for the next generation, is to always be careful out there.
Trust actions and not words.
I think that would be my tip for them. Take care of the world, take care of the planet. That's what I'd like to pass on.
Thank you very much for sharing and thank you very much for your time.
Thank you.
Yeah, after I left school at 17 I went straight into work. I was working in the civil service and I worked almost throughout my life until I became unwell with various disabilities.
And I enjoyed my working life very much. I enjoyed the colleagues and I'm still in touch with many of them.
I'm in touch with certain school friends as well. And we meet on Facebook, on the Facebook group. We chat to each other there.
And I did do a lot of voluntary work as well. Helping organisations, charity organisations to do admin and creative posters.
And my hobbies include artwork, doing paintings and anything creative, photography, clay work.
Is that something you started doing from a little bit of primary school and then into high school?
Yeah, exactly. I did art. I enjoyed it since I was at primary school. I won competitions as well when I was younger.
Okay, like what?
I won, it was to design a Christmas card. And I won that. I can't remember what I won so long ago. I was only about five at the time.
But I'm looking to get back into my, I found my creative side again and I'm looking to get back into that.
And hopefully all being well, if Age Alive will accept, I'm hoping to maybe design a painting for them to put in the office if they agree.
I think it would be rude to disagree.
And then just to hear further about after school, you went to high school and did you go into education or after high school?
Yeah, I did. After high school, I did go back into education, doing various things, including diplomas and various other courses, which I love.
I just enjoyed learning, trying to absorb all this information. I love it.
And in terms of the creativity, is that something you were learning from the course and then you were able to put it into practice as well?
Yes, from courses, from my class. My class is A level in art. So I just continued with it. And then I had a break.
I didn't intend to have a break, but other things happened and I didn't do any for a good, maybe two, almost three decades. I did no art.
And I recently found it again and I'm enjoying it again.
Looking towards seeing you in action in some artistic kind of expressions.
Let's see.
Thank you so much. Yeah, you were just saying about your children. So you've got two sons?
I've got two boys. One of them lives with me. He studied biomedicine and he's in his gap year at the moment and he's hoping to go back to studies in September.
And my other son is married and he's got a lovely wife and lovely two children. So I'm a grandmother, a little girl and a little boy.
And I love them to bits.
Brilliant. Just tell me more, were they both born, what, one? Were they born in Newport?
Actually, no, actually one was born in Roushers. A long story. The eldest one was born in Roushers and came here when he was about three.
And the youngest one was born in London, but he's spent most of his life in Newport. He's been to school in Newport and he plays football, works at the moment part time. So yeah, they're my little family.
Are you able to share a little bit about your eldest being born in Mauritius?
Oh, OK, yeah, I got, I was married once and I lived in Mauritius for a few years and that's when my eldest was born.
And I was very, very young. And the way, I'd say, destiny works, we ended up back in London. And it was, yeah, it's a long, long story for another time maybe.
Which parts of London, like what areas have you lived in?
East London mostly. Grew up in Leighton and lived in Walthamstow. My school, I used to go to school in Leighton as well.
And in fact, I have visited one of my schools, but it's completely changed now. Even got a new name. But yeah, I've got some photographs of my school and the summer fairs that we used to have.
The guests that were invited to the summer fairs were like Captain Bird's Eye from the Fishfingers advert. I remember that well. It's weird, things that stick in my mind out of the blue.
And just to speak on those celebrations, was there in traditions as well, celebrations that you would do with the family?
Oh yeah. We celebrate, our faith is, we're Muslims, so we celebrate Ramadan, which is a whole month of fasting. And then we have Eid, which is family time, time for family to get together, eat, be merry.
And we have two Eids. We've got a smaller Eid as well, which is about three months after the month of fasting. And talking about the month of fasting, Ramadan is coming up next month, actually, so not long.
We don't celebrate Christmas. When we were younger, we used to give cards to our friends. And then as we got older, we realised, well, we don't celebrate it. Let's do it for our festival, give gifts for our festival.
And it was all new back then, like at school, nobody knew what we were talking about when we said we do fasting, for example. Why do you fast? You can't even drink water.
But so much progression has been made and a lot of people just know about it now. Whereas before, nobody understood why we fasted or what Eid was, for example.
And yeah, now a lot of people do know. So it's a good, oneness thing to explain.
I agree. And it just reminded me of what we spoke about earlier on about sharing with our children or the next generation. Can you just speak about how important that is for them to recognise these type of traditions and be immersed in the Eid and Ramadan and see the appearance of the elders doing that as well?
I think they're the fun parts of our childhood, those festivals, our festivals and Ramadan as well. And it's a very spiritual month. So I do think it's important for children to find that spiritual side in them.
And Ramadan is a very good time to find it. It just changes, it changes your life. It really does. It brings us closer to God and makes us realise so many things that we don't realise outside Ramadan. I can't explain it other than it's a very special month.
And you also talked about memorabilia and pictures and things like that. Is there something that you can hold close to your heart, so to speak, in terms of memorabilia?
Oh, yeah. I have, I think earlier I mentioned the Queen's silver jubilee. I remember receiving a mug. Well, my parents have got that. Yeah. But each time I look at, I see that in their display cabinet, the fond memories come back.
And other memorabilia are, I used to do stamp collecting and I still have some stamps. I used to be a big music fan. So I've got a few autographs of my favourite singers.
Yeah. I'd say, I'd say, yeah, they're my memorabilia. And I've been collecting more for my children, actually. Their baby, their little baby toys and their first painting at school, clothes. I've been collecting for them as well.
I remember, I think it was quite similar when you sent the mug then for the jubilee because I think it was here because I live in London. I live in London then, Southampton. And I moved to here and I think it was the silver jubilees around my generation.
And it's the same, I had a mug. There was a feeling that would always come by just looking at the mug.
You had it as well.
Yeah. So we had a mug and then they had a coin as well. So we were given like a jubilee coin and that sense of feeling from just like a memory. Because it was a time they brought everyone together as much as we were all from various parts of the world. But we had that moment to be able to celebrate together.
I think you don't look old enough to be bald at that time.
Yeah, I think it's silver jubilee. It says no follow.
1977.
Oh no, what's the closest jubilee we've had from the time we were here?
Golden.
The golden then. Yeah. I think in the early 2000s I was trying to recall it. I could just see the coin and the mug inside my mind and I'm just like that's it.
I always say they did one for the golden jubilee baby.
Yes.
What can I say? I don't think you were even born in 1977.
No, no.
So yeah, they done that for the golden jubilee then.
Yeah, in the golden and that sense of feeling that comes with the mug.
I like how you just said about even them collecting the ornaments and collecting memorabilia for the children as well.
Because I think that will assist them in remembering that memory when they went to play with that because we're in fast pace motions now and we're in activities and things are happening quickly.
But then those moments are quite precious too, aren't they?
Definitely. And I think when you get to a certain age you do like looking back at your childhood and enjoying the memories that come along.
So hopefully they'll have a few bits to remember as well.
Yeah, exactly. Brilliant.
Thank you.
No, thank you. Thank you very much.